Structure and Interpretation of Computer Programs
=================================================

This document contains excerpts from the book *Structure and
Interpretation of Computer Programs*, second edition by Harold Abelson,
Gerald Jay Sussman, and Julie Sussman.


Dedication
----------

This book is dedicated, in respect and admiration, to the spirit that
lives in the computer.

"I think that it's extraordinarily important that we in computer
science keep fun in computing. When it started out, it was an awful lot
of fun. Of course, the paying customers got shafted every now and then,
and after a while we began to take their complaints seriously. We began
to feel as if we really were responsible for the successful, error-free
perfect use of these machines. I don't think we are. I think we're
responsible for stretching them, setting them off in new directions,
and keeping fun in the house. I hope the field of computer science never
loses its sense of fun. Above all, I hope we don't become missionaries.
Don't feel as if you're Bible salesmen. The world has too many of those
already. What you know about computing other people will learn. Don't
feel as if the key to successful computing is only in your hands. What's
in your hands, I think and hope, is intelligence: the ability to see the
machine as more than when you were first led up to it, that you can make
it more."

---Alan J. Perlis (April 1, 1922 -- February 7, 1990)


Foreword
--------

It is better to have 100 functions operate on one data structure than to
have 10 functions operate on 10 data structures. ...

Alan J. Perlis\
New Haven, Connecticut


Preface to the Second Edition
-----------------------------

We have seen our students take the ideas and programs in this book and
build them in as the core of new computer systems and languages. In
literal realization of an ancient Talmudic pun, our students have become
our builders.


Preface to the First Edition
----------------------------

First, we want to establish the idea that a computer language is not
just a way of getting a computer to perform operations but rather that
it is a novel formal medium for expressing ideas about methodology.
Thus, programs must be written for people to read, and only incidentally
for machines to execute. ...

Underlying our approach to this subject is our conviction that "computer
science" is not a science and that its significance has little to do
with computers. The computer revolution is a revolution in the way we
think and in the way we express what we think. The essence of this
change is the emergence of what might best be called procedural
epistemology---the study of the structure of knowledge from an
imperative point of view, as opposed to the more declarative point of
view taken by classical mathematical subjects. Mathematics provides a
framework for dealing precisely with notions of "what is." Computation
provides a framework for dealing precisely with notions of "how to."


Acknowledgements
----------------

Marvin Minsky and Seymour Papert formed many of our attitudes about
programming and its place in our intellectual lives. To them we owe the
understanding that computation provides a means of expression for
exploring ideas that would otherwise be too complex to deal with
precisely. ...

We do not know who produced the Chinese edition, but we consider it an
honor to have been selected as the subject of an "unauthorized"
translation.
