The Music of the Primes
=======================

This document contains excerpts from the book *The Music of the Primes*
by Marcus du Sautoy.


Chapter 1: Who Wants To Be a Millionaire?
-----------------------------------------

One hot and humid morning in August 1900, David Hilbert of the
University of Göttingen addressed the International Congress of
Mathematicians in a packed lecture hall at the Sorbonne, Paris. Already
recognised as one of the greatest mathematicians of the age, Hilbert had
prepared a daring lecture. He was going to talk about what was unknown
rather than what had already been proved. This went against all the
accepted conventions, and the audience could hear the nervousness in
Hilbert’s voice as he began to lay out his vision for the future of
mathematics. ‘Who of us would not be glad to lift the veil behind which
the future lies hidden; to cast a glance at the next advances of our
science and at the secrets of its development during future centuries?’
To herald the new century, Hilbert challenged the audience with a list
of twenty-three problems that he believed should set the course for the
mathematical explorers of the twentieth century.

The ensuing decades saw many of the problems answered, and those who
discovered the solutions make up an illustrious band of mathematicians
known as ‘the honours class’. It includes the likes of Kurt Gödel and
Henri Poincaré, along with many other pioneers whose ideas have
transformed the mathematical landscape. But there was one problem, the
eighth on Hilbert’s list, which looked as if it would survive the
century without a champion: the Riemann Hypothesis.

...

The announcement came in a letter from Professor Enrico Bombieri. One
could not have asked for a better, more respected source. Bombieri is
one of the guardians of the Riemann Hypothesis and is based at the
prestigious Institute for Advanced Study in Princeton, once home to
Einstein and Gödel. He is very softly spoken, but mathematicians always
listen carefully to anything he has to say.

...

Bombieri grew up in Italy, where his prosperous family's vineyards gave
him a taste for the good things in life. He is fondly referred to by
colleagues as 'the Mathematical Aristocrat'. ...

Several years previously, the mathematical world had been set alight by
the news that Alain Connes had turned his attention to trying to crack
the Riemann Hypothesis. ...

Connes is based at France's answer to the Institute in Princeton, the
Institut des Hautes Études Scientifiques in Paris. Since his arrival
there in 1979, he has created a completely new language for
understanding geometry. He is not afraid to take the subject to the
extremes of abstraction. ...

Memories were still fresh with the excitement of a few years earlier
when an English mathematician, Andrew Wiles, had announced a proof of
Fermat’s Last Theorem in a lecture delivered in Cambridge in June 1993.
Wiles had proved that Fermat had been right in his claim that the
equation x^n + y^n = z^n has no solutions when n is bigger than 2. As
Wiles laid down his chalk at the end of the lecture, the champagne
bottles started popping and the cameras began flashing.

...

As the French mathematician Henri Poincaré wrote, 'The scientist does
not study Nature because it is useful; he studies it because he delights
in it, and he delights in it because it is beautiful. If Nature were not
beautiful, it would not be worth knowing, and if Nature were not worth
knowing, life would not be worth living.'

...

As the Cambridge mathematician G.H. Hardy said in his famous book *A
Mathematician's Apology*, '317 is a prime not because we think so, or
because our minds are shaped in one way or another, but *because it is
so*, because mathematical reality is built that way.'

...

Indeed, even in the 1940s G.H. Hardy was of the same mind: 'both Gauss
and lesser mathematicians may be justified in rejoicing that here is one
science [number theory] at any rate whose very remoteness from ordinary
human activities should keep it gentle and clean'.

...

Every time you place an order on a website, your computer is using the
security provided by the existence of prime numbers with a hundred
digits. The system is called RSA after its three inventors. So far, over
a million primes have already been put to use to protect the world of
electronic commerce.

...
